***From FASTQ to Figure: Why Most Bioinformatics Pipelines Fail at the Last Mile***

*Introduction*

Modern Bioinformatics pipelines such as nextflow, snakemake are powerful and provide a streamlined workflow for bioinformatics. From FASTQ file through quality check, trimming, sequence alignment and quantification. Although in most cases these pipelines overlook the most crucial part of data analysis which is visualization. For instance, in molecular biology, a large proportion of genomics data interpretation relies on visualization such as the creation of phylogenetic trees. However, research shows a current process for constructing and refining these data are inefficient (Black et al, 2020). In practice, pipelines often end with plots that are difficult to read and not very informative. Data visualization makes a crucial component in analysis, because when figures are less intuitive, it makes scientific decision a nightmare. For example, communicating findings to multi-disciplinary team can be challenging.

In most workflows, visualization is often treated as an add on instead of an integral part of the analysis/research question. Black et al, 2020 mentioned that visualization is often generated in a monolithic series of computations from raw sequencing reads and ends in single image. In most instances, genome data cannot be visualized and explored in many ways. After obtaining the result, default plot functions are executed to generate figures matches the data but lack inconsistency. For instance, color is arbitrary, legend contains missing information, axis might be lacking context. The figure of the plot lists the data but doesn’t interpret a meaning. In addition to lack of context, reproducibility is also affected. According to (Black et al, 2020), reproducible research requires figures to be generated from code with all parameters explicitly defined. Most pipelines use a narrow open-source software programs which could affect comparability of data and processes across agencies.

Tools such as ggplot2, complexheatmap are powerful in R programming language and encourage critical thinking in how data should be designed. Bioinformaticians should choose plots based on biological questions and annotating figures to guide interpretation. Previous studies recommend taking a more functional and modular approach. Analytic and visualization workflow should be separated from pipelines assembly (Black et al, 2020).In the healthcare industry, most clinicians/health practitioners are not formally trained in genomics background hence lack skills when handling genomics data. Researchers must ensure that data visualizations effectively capture and convey uncertainties to experts and non experts.

*Biblography:*

Black, A., MacCannell, D.R., Sibley, T.R. and Bedford, T. (2020). Ten recommendations for supporting open pathogen genomic analysis in public health. Nature Medicine, 26(6), 832–841. 
